# Agentic automation: The path to an orchestrated enterprise

In recent years, the introduction of AI has increased the power and impact of enterprise automation, enabling us to strive for ever-greater efficiency and productivity. At the same time, the processes these automations are empowering have also grown in complexity. Investment has poured into siloed enterprise systems, with the average large company now using over 175 enterprise applications across their workflows. Data has become more siloed and processes more fragmented. Many decisions within a workflow aren't clear-cut, requiring people to step in—all of which adds to the operational burden. Finally, the complexity of these processes means they cannot cohesively be monitored, optimized, or fully automated.

A new era for automation—agentic automation—provides a new path forward. Combining agents, robots, AI, and people, agentic automation can automate even the longest, most complex processes end to end. Working effortlessly across disparate systems, it will deliver transformational outcomes across the enterprise, making businesses more autonomous and productive while enhancing the experiences of customers and employees. Agents are increasingly taking on the majority of work, while people continue and expand their roles as supervisors, decision makers, and leaders.

At our most recent UiPath FORWARD, our CEO Daniel Dines and Chief Product Officer Graham Sheldon introduced the UiPath vision for agentic automation. At the AI Summit New York, I had the great pleasure of diving deeper and sharing more details around our vision on how all the pieces of agentic automation fit together. Here’s a quick recap:

# What does the agentic and robotic future look like?

Businesses have known and benefitted from robotic process automation (RPA) for years. Robots perform work tasks by interacting with screens, systems, and data like people do. They are rules-based, act predictably, and make deterministic decisions. This makes them highly reliable and efficient for routine tasks that don't need adaptability or decision making skills—like entering data, processing transactions, or triggering responses.

AI agents are a much newer, emerging technology. Agents are AI-model-based, enabling them to work independently of people and improve over time. There are many different types of agents, but they are generally goal-oriented and able to use context to make proactive and probabilistic decisions. This makes them complementary to robots and ideal for complex processes that require high adaptability. Imagine you need to book a flight for work: an agent could plan the entire trip, comparing flight and hotel prices to get you the best deal before booking everything for you. And it could adhere to company policies, like cost, location, approved airlines and hotels.

While flexible and powerful, agents can’t handle an entire process all by themselves. Agents need humans to monitor their performance, approve, and improve their work. But agents also need robots to complete many of the individual, routine tasks that make up long-running enterprise processes. Just like any employee, every agent has a toolbox of tools and capabilities they need to do their job. Alongside API connectors and intelligent document processing, robots are one of the handiest tools in the toolbox! Consider the travel booking example: to book the flight or hotel, an agent needs to ‘call’ on a robot to input the passenger's information, including name and payment details, to complete the process.

To automate long, complex, and dynamic enterprise processes, agents and robots need to work together. A useful (though simplified) analogy is the left and right parts of the brain working together. In the emerging autonomous enterprise, important and logical left-brain tasks, like data gathering, entry, and migration, will be done by robots. Creative and dynamic right-brain tasks—forecasting, comparison, innovation, and problem solving—will be performed by agents. This combination of capabilities makes agents and robots a power couple poised to automate the majority of all ‘work.'
